Go back to question one. When and where were you in
Vietnam? 67 to late 68. We were boarded from
Seattle, Washington to Battalion. We spent about
21 days going across. We landed in the Philippine
Islands, Subi Beach. From there, it was about
three days. And we landed in Bontown. It's about
15, 20 miles from Saigon. From there, we were
airlifted to Bengua, which at that time, Bengua
was just an airstrip in 1967. Later, it was
expanded. When I came back, we flew out of Bengua,
and it was more like a big airstrip.
Then while we went into a
long time, the base camp there was known as Bear
Camp, home of the 9th Infantry. It was a division
coming from Kansas City to Kansas. And you
probably recall the mobile airlift. OK, that was a
division that was airlifted from Kansas in 1966.
So we went there as a supporting unit to back up the
Thailand soldiers coming in from Thailand.
Before we got there, it was just junk. That was it.
We went in there to clear the area for them. And
late, uh, back in early September, that's when the
base camp was already secured. And they came in
under, Westmoreland was there. He was the guy that
brought them in. And from there, we just did our
regular
search, destroyed. Our firefighters came about
30, 40 miles from that area. We protected more
mainly the long, thin properties, which was Cuxi,
Bensal, La Trang. Six or seven different
families. A lot of them were just villages.
Highway 1 was just a dirt road. You know, you could
just, maybe one vehicle at a time. When we left, I
left way back in 68, May 68. The road was expanded,
maybe where you could have two vehicles. And it was
mainly for, there was no one-way tracks.
Everything was there. We had the personal
carriers running around, the artillery, tanks,
everything. Engineering equipment was going all
over the place. And some of those things happened.
Okay. How did you feel at the time, back in 66, 67,
when you went to serve in Vietnam, what you were
doing? In 66, 65, really, I was going to school.
Then after, I dropped out. When I went to work in the
40s. So I ended up in Chicago. working with Western
Vet Company. But all this time, I knew about the
Vietnam War, what was going on, or the war. And when
the draft started to come around, and I knew I was
going to be up to it. In fact, I even received a
letter from President Johnson. I went ahead and
volunteered the draft. And I came all the way to
McAllen. I could have come from upstate. But I knew
there was a lot of guys here that were going to be
also drafted. So I tried to come down to Macau or
West Lake, or Mercedes and maybe get it, I mean, go
as a buddy system type. But going into the war or
going into the Vietnam crisis, that was, I think
what I was just looking for, to go in there and help
out. or be part of it. There was no doubt in my mind I
was gonna let down or I was gonna find an excuse to
get out of it. You know another thing that a lot of us
that served, or my age, we came from a military
family background. My uncle served in World War II
Korea. So that's had to do a lot with our attitude,
pointing to this thing here, being patriotic to
the cause. And probably being because of
Americano, Chicano heritage, we kind of look up to
keeping our own traditions going. And I think most
of the Mexicans that served, that I knew from
California, Nevada, all the Southwest had the
same feeling. You know, there was never a guy in my
mind that when we went out on patrol that wanted to
cop out. We all stayed together. There were about
four or five of us. But talking to some of the guys in
different areas, they had the same feeling. And
the same thing went for the blacks and the whites. I
mean, we were all working together. We made 66, 67,
68 people there who had no resent against what we
were doing there. I think we all believed that we
were doing it for one reason, and that we were
serving the country. And they were living to those
standards that were laid back by other
generations. They had served in World War II,
South Pacific, across Europe. Maybe that's the
way I feel, and I still feel the same way. If I had to
do it again, hey, I would go back and I would
probably do the same thing. You mentioned that
some of your friends around here felt pretty bad
they were rejected by the... You know, as a matter
of fact, a lot of us, I still remember very vividly
when we left McCallum and we were in the VTC bus was
provided for us. A lot of them were rejected. They
didn't want to come back. They felt bad about it.
They wanted to stay. They wanted to stay. What was
the reason behind that? Can you explain that? The
guy was rejected. Physically? Yeah. Why? Why they
felt bad? Well, they felt that...
I guess peer pressure,
the way we were raised. Most of the guys that I knew
were athletes. We played ball together. We did all
those things in school.
Did you think you played an important role in
Vietnam?
Well, yeah, I think so. First thing that, you know,
from my own personal view and the way I was raised,
you know, being there and seeing what I saw with the
people there, it's kind of like seeing yourself
back home, you know, with poverty.
The whole life standards maybe you can say 20, 30
years behind that time compared to the United
States. So coming from our area, you could see
that, hey, this is the same thing that could happen
back in the States. Poverty,
the whole aspect was just trying to help people
over there and maybe show them, hey, We are here to
help you, and if you understand our ways, maybe we
can overthrow whatever the government is trying
to take over you guys. Basically, that's what it
is. The economic aspect.
What I saw there, and the things we were trying to
accomplish is, I think basically it was to help the
village people. even if we could just educate them
a little bit and and work on their own necessity you
know survive
that's what i kind of transpired to or i wanted to
leave that behind you know not necessarily the
american gi or because we had australians there
people from korea and thailand they were all doing
that for the same cause, helping the people. I
think that was my main idea was we were there, and
we're going to treat these people here like we
treated our own back home. But being from the
Valley, did you find things, was it easier to
relate to these people who were poor? Yeah, well,
you could always see yourself, like, Since we're
close to Mexico, and you're almost different, the
same atmosphere about going across the border and
seeing the things that happen there is the same
thing that happens in undeveloped countries. And
basically, that's how we see those people there.
Exactly, if you go across right now, go to those
villages out there, you see the same thing right
now. And that's how I think it was a carry over
10,000 miles away from here. And basically,
that's how we look things up. I mean, people that
came from the valley. We had other guys that, of
course, came from the Middle States. They
couldn't understand that. because of their
background. But I think the Mexicans that went
over there had a better understanding of why these
people were living the way they did. Basically, it
was education had to play a vital part. People
tried to understand. What did you think of the US
military during the war when you were over there?
The military aspect I think was very strong, very,
very strong feelings. We were there and we felt
that we were the best.
That the army, that the whole armed forces were
very, not rigid, but strong. Nothing was gonna
stop us. We had the power, we had the knowledge. I
think the most important part was being patriotic
to the cause. You wanted to be part of that. I feel
that every person that served at that time felt the
same way. I don't recall, none of those guys are
about the riots going back on or anything like
that. We felt very strong about the armed forces.
And we felt like, hey, we're part
of it. Did you encounter any problems in Vietnam
because you were a Chicano or Hispanic?
Not in Vietnam. There was a little bit of it here in
the States. basic training for the poor
population. Most of your Hispanics went to Fort
Paul. And it was, you know, maybe you can call it
little things. It was in the enlistment
personnel. And of course, you're gonna have names
calling, you know, a greaser, and gringo, and
negro, black. But mainly it was under that range of
the young guys, the 18, 19 years old. Not from the
superiors? Not from the high rank, or the people
that were there, the drill sergeants. And if they
did call you, it was trying to see how much pressure
you could take, or see what was your response to
something like that. I think it was just more
trying to test you. You know, I was called dirty
Mexican. And I didn't respond back to him when I was
taking this surgery. I think it had to do with how we
were raised, you know, from my home, you know, with
a lot of respect and stuff like that. And we knew
that the real surgeon was going to come after us
hard, trying to weave out the guy that was, you
know, not supportive towards us. But that's the
only encounter I had. as, you know,
discrimination. But I don't call it
discrimination. It was more like harassment. But
in Vietnam there was more unity? Vietnam was a
completely different thing. It was more like
we're a family back there. You know, we stick
together. You could tell black, brown, white.
Man, in fact, most of my best buddies were white.
Blacks. We all drank together. We drank together,
we slept together, and fought together. And we
protected each other. We were very close. We
volunteered. When one guy volunteered for my
squad, everybody wanted to volunteer.
We all wanted to be together. We went to a village
for recreation. We went for recreation. We kind of
looked pretty short. We wrote letters. Some guys
couldn't write, so I would sit down with them and I
would write the letters. I know a guy from Utah,
John Baswell.
John Bowen. He couldn't write. It was about nine
years old. So I used to write his letters. You know,
just mine. So I took care of his quality. Of course,
I was 21 years old, so I was considered a little bit
older. So I was 17, 18 years old. So they look up to my
age, I guess, because I was a little bit older, like
the big brother type. And I was a little bit more
mature. I took care of those little kids. The
youngest was a kid from North Carolina, Billy
Graham. He was 17 years
old. You know, he always He always wanted to be with
me, because he knew that I was very disciplined on
my ways. I wanted to come back home. I was married,
and I had a little girl back home. And I told the guy,
hey, man, I got something to go home. So I guess that
kind of helped him out. They took care of what we
were trying to do. So there was no drug fit. And if
there were drugs, they hide it. Nothing like back
in the 70s, whatever. 67, 68, we were very serious
about the war. I know the American soldiers. What
was there was very serious.
I don't think casualties-wise were that
prolonged tremendously way back in those years.
We were very careful about it. People got careless
maybe later in the late part of the Vietnam War.
But, you know, talking from experience, I don't
think we, casualty-wise,
was not because we were careless, you know, what we
were doing. We were trained, and I think we went
ahead and performed like people wanted us to
perform. doing our job. And nothing, we gave it
100%. That's what we're working on. How have your
views changed since the time you were in Vietnam,
if any? To the press? Yeah.
You know, here we were in 1986. 1966 is 20 years ago.
To me,
you can see it and you can break it down into two
parts. When I came back, it's
not hate, but it was something that people were
blaming the American soldier for something that
they were doing that on reality can be happening
right now. to our own people. But
I guess the only people that can understand that
face is the soldier that was there, that
understands that Vietnam, that war is not just
fighting. You have to fight all kinds of things.
Poverty is one thing.
Abuse. That's part of war. The nearest people
never bring their stuff out. They always tell you
how many guys died. They never tell you what it's
called behind the scenes. And that's what's
worse. When I look at people taking advantage of
what we have, which is freedom, they really don't
know what they have
until they lose it. And that's telling you that
some guy coming in and saying, hey, tomorrow
you're going to die. That's what I'm talking
about. And I hope it will never happen here, but
something like that bothers me. We have Nicaragua
today. And I always have felt it. And Vietnam was an
example for us. We could have stopped communist
aggression there. If the politicians only knew
what goes on the battlegrounds, they don't know.
They need to be there. Then they will probably
realize, hey, if we don't stop them right there,
1,500 miles from here, hey, they're going to be
right there behind our back door. I guarantee you
that. That's the way it works. And we had a chance in
Vietnam. And Vietnam was 10,000 miles away from
home. Now we're down 1,500 miles. And that's
scary. That is scary. So I don't know what can
happen.
I don't know, maybe they envy the American people.
Maybe they envy the American lifestyle. I think
they do. You know, it's, communist people,
communists, they hate the American GI. I know
that. And I don't know if you've heard
commentaries from Libya or Castro,
and they say our dream is to come and conquer the
American people. They will not destroy it,
because they want to take it as intact, because we
have built so much. They're not going to bum it out.
They're not going to blow it. They want to take it
while they're serving people because they like
what we do. And talking about being 20 years and
thinking now about what we have, we don't protect
it now. And here we got a lot of young people coming
out, young men. And you ask them about the armed
services, Hey, they have a very negative
attitude. They have a very negative attitude. But
if you ask them, do you enjoy lifestyle, about the
American lifestyle, that someone will nod their
head and some guys can't even answer to. Because
you know what you're going to ask them next time. If
we enjoy peace, hey, we're going to pay the price
for it. Even if you have to give your life out there.
Somebody has to. But again, it's not fair that only
a very few can do it, where others can relax back and
enjoy the rest of their lives. And that's what
worries me, and that's what I think upsets me a lot.
The Vietnam crisis had to do a lot with it. You know,
deformative, college deformatives, rev
dodgers. All those people now are 42, 43, 44, 45
years old. Some of those guys are in Congress right
now. But if you ask them, what were you when Vietnam
was going on and what the heck were you doing?
They give you a negative attitude or a negative
answer.
I've talked
to ex-people. They can never give you a straight
answer. Not now. And they never will. Maybe they
were ashamed of me, you know. Say, hey, I have heard
people say, hey, I wanted to go, but they never
called for me. You know. And I ask, but hey, I didn't
call. I mean, I got a call, but hey, I went ahead and
took it. I said, I'm willing to go now. I took the
risk. And maybe people don't want to do that
nowadays. They're afraid to take the number one
step. Serve your country. And I guarantee you,
you'll feel better about it. My family, they're
very proud. They're very proud that I served. They
have never given me a negative attitude. They have
never said, why did I serve? I think their own
reasonings or their own views, the way I feel, is
carried on to my daughters, you know, because they
want to pursue into the armed forces. So, and then I
guess the tradition has been carried on from my
father to the military. Okay. You had two brothers
in Vietnam, two other brothers that served in
Vietnam. Did they have the same reasons for being
out there? Basically, it was the same reasons that
I just finished telling you. He was the family
background. My other brother's twin brother.
And we always compete, athletics, school,
whatever. But I always have felt that the reason he
went to Vietnam because I had served. And he was in
college, and he could stay. And he was a junior in
Pan American when he decided to join. And I was
still there. I was in Vietnam in 68. He was in the
court place in Paso in 68. When I got back, as soon as
I got back, he put a 1049, go Vietnam. And he went, he
was here.
And then he came back. I was in school. I went back to
school on the GI. And talking about competing, I
was behind by two years. So I told him, when he got
back, hey, I challenge you. I want to try to finish
school before you do. And he only had about a month
to go, or maybe a semester. But anyway, he went
ahead and graduated in May, and I graduated in
August. And my other brother, he's the youngest,
he also volunteered.
He served in Korea. And then he, at that time, my
brother was in Vietnam. So I guess for reasons, as
soon as he left Vietnam, he also served. One of them
had served. So we had three brothers, myself and
two more. And my family never did complain. My mom
never did protest or never wrote the
congressman's here or the representative about
having three sons serve in Vietnam. I guess my dad
never wanted that.
And he never did brag about it. No, he died two years
ago. And he never said, when we all came back, he
never said nothing about how was the war.
I guess he, on his own ways of doing things, he felt
proud. And of course, all his brothers were
veterans. So I guess that's how he pictured the
whole thing. That tradition is still what's going
on. It carried on through us.
And if there's another war, hey, maybe some guys
will be part of our family, probably doing the same
thing. Because I think all our relatives are our
family. They feel the same way.
serving the country.
What did you think of the Vietnamese people when
you were over there?
The Vietnamese, they wanted the G.I. to be there.
Economically, it was one of them.
They were friendly. And basically what I'm
talking about is the villagers, the old people. I
never saw the young guys, the young men. They were
probably in the unfortunate. The contact that we
had was mainly with the papasan, the namasan, the
kids.
and I you know they treated us like hey you're the
number one GI you know especially Hispanics that
you know dark-skinned Hispanics they kind of look
up to us like you're big you're strong and I guess we
were more like a model to them that hey it can happen
you can win the sport and they believe us they had a
lot of trust so They
had us there, you know, like something good had
happened to them.
And it bothers me a little bit when we're going back
to the three-brother store in Vietnam.
You know, it's, you know, being a parent now, I just
wonder how my parents felt having three sons back
to back. It's a worried aspect. And then you wonder
about the people that protest the war. They saw
that little people that had relatives brothers,
sisters, whatever some girls say. In my mind, they
never had a doubt in their mind about the family,
what they were going through. And so it's putting
the GI down. And maybe we learn a lesson today. If
we're going to get involved in another conflict,
maybe to me, If people want to protest, then they
don't belong in this country. That's what I feel.
Because they like the American style of living.
Hey, you shouldn't have no questions on my mind.
Hey, why should you go against things that we're
trying to accomplish in other places? But hey,
man, it can happen here. I guarantee you that. I
guarantee you that. And when you see, you know,
people like in Vietnam that were killed and all
this other stuff that happened, rape for one
thing, then you wonder. You wonder about it. And I
guess what makes a complete different person, the
GI they have served, But we know from firsthand,
because we were there and we saw it. And we can feel
it, what can happen overnight. I could see it right
now. I could see somebody out there behind my
backyard.
And it bothers me. It really bothers me. Sometimes
I go out there, sightseeing, behind our backyard,
and I go behind our backyard to Rio Grande do Rio
right there, Rio. And I just, you know, in my mind I
could just see people coming across.
Infiltration. And that's how it starts. And
people that come, they call this all this riot and
stuff, you know, it's all communists. And they're
not going to get through military faces. They're
going to go through education
or other aspects of communist tactics. And I think
that's one of the ways they penetrate the society
of the American people, by getting all this
information into the public, whether it's the
media or TV media or whatever. Here, Reagan is
asking for $100 million. Hey, my point of view,
hey, give him the $100 million. Hey, it's money.
When you start putting lives out there and you
start losing lives, now how much is $100 million
going to cover one? Hey, money, that becomes a
very, it's a little thing. You know, it's becoming
a, you know, if the guy wants $100 million, give it
to him. Give him that. When you start putting
military personnel, people are going to get hurt.
And I can see it right now. And it's not going to be
100 or 200 casualties. It was back, but Vietnam
had, you know, right there. So here we, you know, I
think the GI, the guy that was really involved in
the military, they can tell you right now, When it
comes to money, you can't buy lots of money.